How We Read
Want to be a faster reader? Lengthen your saccade length.
Reading behavior, however, was affected by the size of the moving window. Saccades were shortest with a 7-character window, regardless of whether text was in normal or PM font. Moreover, saccade length was identical for the 14- and 21- character and no-window conditions.
Thus, our findings replicate the classic finding that the perceptual span for normal text extends 14 characters to the right of fixation.
These results confirm that the perceptual span is limited by attentional rather than visual constraints, with the physical size of the span adapting to the amount of information to be processed.
Experiment 2 showed that the frequency and predictability of the noun (Word 2) in a noun phrase affected fixations on the preceding adjective (Word 1).
glasgow paper

Better bouma.
The nebulous shape of a given word is called its “bouma”, and a font which produces more distinctive boumas enjoys greater readability.
microfoundry

The top halfs of letters more informative than the bottom half.

Spritz doesn’t allow the back and forth, or fixation pauses.

our eyes look at different letters in the same word and then combine the different images through a process known as fusion.
science daily

should we bold recommended fixations?
spa ces   be tween   syll ab les ,   in  add  i  tion  to   words?

we don’t read letters, we read syllables.
when we’re confident readers we guess at following syllables and make corrections later.

THE STRATEGY EMPLOYED IN READING
The strategy employed in reading does not differ significantly from that for general scenes. However, to aid in communications, additional sets of rules have been adopted related to spelling and syntax that are not required for general scene interpretation.

The syntactic rules include a stop symbol (the period) that defines the end of the presentation of a a particular concept. By this means, a sentence is formed that is similar to an object within a general scene. The concepts associated with multiple sentences can be grouped into a broader concept. This grouping is lableld a paragraph in pedagogy.

We know that we can read without punctuation or vowels, and without the bottom halves of words.

We know that the focal radius is very, very small. Things are mostly blurry to us.

We read in sylables, not letters. Otherwise we'd constantly have to make corrections when we encountered a letter combinations. For example, we don't see a "t", "h", "a", "t", we see "that", anf hear it in our heads. (How deaf people read is a feat using different tactics.)

We take in a fixed amount of letters at a time. Better readers take in more letters at a time.

sci ameri
In fact, the brain essentially regards letters as physical objects because it does not really have another way of understanding them. 
 As Wolf explains in her book Proust and the Squid, we are not born with brain circuits dedicated to reading. After all, we did not invent writing until relatively recently in our evolutionary history, around the fourth millennium B.C. So the human brain improvises a brand-new circuit for reading by weaving together various regions of neural tissue devoted to other abilities, such as spoken language, motor coordination and vision.
 (The Ancient Olympics is older than reading is.)

 Some of these repurposed brain regions are specialized for object recognition—they are networks of neurons that help us instantly distinguish an apple from an orange, for example, yet classify both as fruit. Just as we learn that certain features—roundness, a twiggy stem, smooth skin—characterize an apple, we learn to recognize each letter by its particular arrangement of lines, curves and hollow spaces. Some of the earliest forms of writing, such as Sumerian cuneiform, began as characters shaped like the objects they represented—a person's head, an ear of barley, a fish. Some researchers see traces of these origins in modern alphabets: C as crescent moon, S as snake. Especially intricate characters—such as Chinese hanzi and Japanese kanji—activate motor regions in the brain involved in forming those characters on paper: The brain literally goes through the motions of writing when reading, even if the hands are empty. Researchers recently discovered that the same thing happens in a milder way when some people read cursive.


 Reading about something makes you feel like you're doing it. http://www.scientificamerican.com/podcast/episode/brains-moving-experience-when-readi-09-07-30/

 There is evidence that for all languages, reading activates a shape-recognition region in the brain’s posterior left hemisphere — the visual word-forming area (VWFA). 

 reading chinese lithograph activates same part of brain as alphabetic - suggesting both are looking at shape.
 http://www.nature.com/news/brain-s-reading-centres-are-culturally-universal-1.11883

Regressions are an important part of reading. You look back over to make sure you understand. (Pschy Science)

http://psi.sagepub.com/content/17/1/4.abstract

it takes many years to learn to read. we start reading out loud. for centuries everyone read out loud.

we recognize abstract forms, not visual templates, which is why we can read in different fonts

 It also suggests
that every reader is unique in terms of the timing and
sequence of words he or she needs to directly look at in
order to read efficiently. What works for some people,
such as the initial readers in Fisher and Shebilske’s study,
who were able to choose which words they fixated, does
not work for others, such as the readers who got the
modified text. The implication is that speed-reading
devices that control the timing of word presentation may
not be ready to use “out of the box” but instead may
need to be tailored to each individual user based on how
that person would naturally process the text.

we use same part of brain as when looking at a landscape which is why you can remember where on the page a sentence was, and why paper readers can remember text longer than digital readers.


Visual perception occurs very rapidly—so
rapidly, in fact, that even if a word disappears completely
after being directly looked at for only 60 ms, reading
behavior is unaffected. That is, fixation durations have
been shown to be similar regardless of whether the word
remains visible or is erased or masked after 60 ms (Ishida
& Ikeda, 1989), and in both cases, the durations continue
to be sensitive to linguistic properties of the fixated word
(e.g., how common it is; Rayner et al., 2003). These findings
suggest that visual perception takes up only a small
fraction of fixation durations, leaving time for higherlevel
cognitive and linguistic processing to occur before
the decision of when to move the eyes next



